---
layout: post
title: Courageously Weird
---
<p>My highest priority as a Christian parent is to hear my kids say, "Dad, your God is my God". I want my children to trust in the Lord for their salvation. I realize how strange (or dangerous) that may sound to some. If that's the case, be assured that I do have other priorites for my kids in the realms of education, physical development, relational skills and such, but they all flow from, and are subservient to, cultivating in them a love for God. I am not going to defend or rationalize that priority here, though not because I am incapable of doing so. Perhaps another day. For now, I want to focus on something else.</p>

<p>In addition to the struggle against the world that is the common experience of each Christian, every generation has it's own particular social and cultural constructions that are either a help or a hindrance to cultivating a love for God. I can be the Platonic ideal of the diligent Christian parent but at the end of the day I do not have access to the interior of their hearts and minds. I cannot "be" them as they deal with the temptations, philosophical wrestlings, and emotional struggles that are not only unique to them as people, but unique to them in their experience as 21st century kids. Technology brings easy access to things that were harder to find 15 years ago, as one example. Add to that the fact that parents oftentimes plain <i>forget</i> what it was like to be a young person, and feel young person emotions, and you see one of the challenges of Christian parenting.</p>

<p>Smarter men than I (which it's not difficult to be) have done fantastic work in analyzing 21st century North American culture from a Christian perspective. I am just a humble computer programmer, and I'm not getting ideas above my station. However, there's one area of modern culture that has been fascinating and alarming to me recently in the context of this discussion, and that is what groups of people can achieve by leveraging the power of the internet to make communities. We've seen the remarkable power of the internet to spread ideas and bring groups of people together across continents. From online communities like Reddit and 4chan to movements like the Arab Spring, Anonymous, Occupy Wall Street; whatever your opinions about these groups, it's been amazing to see them at work with simple tools.</p>

<p>I don't think I am being a myopic web geek by saying this: you may not realize how influential social media and internet communities are in shaping our culture. When the President of the United States <a href="http://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/z1c9z/i_am_barack_obama_president_of_the_united_states/">does an AMA on Reddit</a>, that tells you everything you need to be about their influence. Like any community, even within diversity there is a basic unity of belief. From my experience, these communities tend to be indifferent, if not hostile, to God and Christianity and tolerant of practices and philosophies that Christians would strongly oppose. I realize I am generalizing. I am sure there are Christians on Reddit encouraging each other in the faith. But as a percentage of Reddit users, my guess is they are a small group. Indeed, <a href="http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=4044664">a commenter on Hacker News</a> was surprised when I admitted to being a Christian hacker, as he thought being a hacker de facto meant being an atheist. I know for a fact that there are Christian hackers, on Hacker News, but the comment nevertheless was telling.</p>

<p>This by itself is not a unique problem for Christian parents. There's nothing new about groups that are generally hostile to our faith. But what is different is the way these groups have leveraged the web to influence the popular culture that you (and your child) will come in contact with everyday. The cool kids, creating all the cool culture on TV, doing interesting things in the world, are now residing in the types of communities referenced above, and they are by and large hostile to the very faith you are trying to nurture in your children.  And it can feel like they have the loudest voice in the public square, by virtue of the power of their communities.  It's one thing if your kid's friend at school ridicules him for believing in Jesus, it's another entirely if your child feels like <i>the whole internet</i> is ridiculing him.</p>

<p>This may be a problem only for a subset of kids.  It's certainly not <i>the</i> big problem facing our children in this generation.  But I think it's one we should be aware of.</p>

<p>So what can we do? Should we homeschool, never let our kids on the internet, never let them watch TV, keep them wrapped in cotton until they get married and then buy them and their spouse a farm somewhere rural where there's no web access?  I think there's something more fundamental, something our kids have needed in every generation, but need now more so: courage. The courage to be weird.</p>

<p>Being a Christian has always meant being seen as a little weird. The Apostle Paul, in the first letter to the church at Corinth, said that the preaching of Christ was "folly to the Greeks". Even 2000 years ago, Christians were getting sideways glances from the learned folks of their time. The beliefs of orthodox, historical Christianity on things like the origin of the universe, marriage, the rights of the unborn, are all seen as outdated at best, intellectually dangerous at worst (HT: Richard Dawkins). If our children are going to love God, and His word, they will need to be courageous in the face of not just opposition, but ridicule. Kids hate being ridiculed. They long for community, to feel a part of something, to be included by those they look up to. It's hard for a kid to stand alone in his convictions. Even harder when the opposition  is nameless, faceless, and global, and growing in influence.  This is why we need to cultivate courage in our children.</p>

<h3>Practicals</h3>

<p>I think the best way to cultivate courage in our children is to cultivate in them a love for God Himself. Their love for God has to be so strong and personal, that the thought of straying from Him brings with it not only a head knowledge of the consequences of sin, but a visceral emotional recoiling from wanting to stray from the One whom they love. It has to be a love that withstands the pull of the world.</p>

<p>I also think it's a good idea to head off the assault from rationalistic humanism by introducing the idea of Christian mystery to a child at a young age. While I do believe I am intellectually warranted to believe in Christianity, I accept that there are some things about it that on the surface do not make sense, that <i>seem</i> irrational. The 6-day creation, the virgin birth, the problem of evil, Jesus' resurrection, the doctrine on the Trinity, among many others. I don't think there's anything wrong with telling a child: "there are some things we will never fully understand in this life about the realities which are spoken of in Scripture, but that is because we are finite creatures in a fallen world." If my child knows and loves God, they are more apt to trust Him in the face of mystery rather than reject Christianity as superstition.</p>

<p>I'd also not shy away from questions and letting your young child encounter critics of Christianity. We have nothing to be afraid of. As a young man, I read Bertrand Russell's <i>Why I Am Not A Christian</i>, read existential philosophy in college and had many debates with non-Christian friends. I was exposed to the objections to Christianity at a young age, and they did not come as a shock to me when I entered college. I did struggle with doubt at times, but I could never get past the fact that I knew and loved God, had seen His working in my life, and was convinced in my heart of the truth of His word. I did not base my faith on my experience, but my experience reinforced the truth of my belief and the reality of God as my Father.  To you this is psychobabble, to me it is experiential Christianity.  I told you we're a little weird.</p>

<p>Lastly, but certainly not least, your children should be in worship every week. Worship is transformative. It reminds us that we are part of a community of other believers. The history of the Bible, the history of the community, is our history, just as much as my family's history. Worship takes us out of ourselves and reorients our hearts toward God. Worship gives us perspective. At <a href="http://trinitychurchlongisland.com">Trinity Church</a>, our liturgy involves ancient hymns, raised hands, kneeling, recitation of historic creeds, reading of Scripture, the preaching of the Bible, the giving of gifts, and the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. All of these things are formative, and counter-cultural (<a href="http://thegospelcoalition.org/blogs/trevinwax/2010/01/12/spiritual-formation-through-desire-an-interview-with-james-k-a-smith/">James K.A. Smith</a> has <a href="http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0801035775">written beautifully</a> on this topic). Corporate worship is one of the greatest tools the Lord has given in us to cultivate a superior love for God in our children.</p>

<h3>Conclusion</h3>
<p>I could very well be wrong. I am, after all, just a humble pusher of bits. But I believe the only way my children will be able to stand up the particular challenges of their generation is by being courageous, and the only way to be courageous is to have a deep, satisfying love for the Lord of the universe.</p>